# Seaside chat: Psychological safety

_Planning notes on a 2024-01-11 meeting with Sunny Hospital, Stefanie Butland, Matt
Fisher._


## What is a seaside chat?

The idea is encouraging a working team to have a regularly scheduled
session without an agenda but it's about conversations. Deciding what you want to learn
as a team, for example.

The chat would start with a topic, and participants would lead.

Reminds Matt of
[Open Space Technology](https://peggyholman.com/papers/articles/good-work-for-2100-colombian-street-kids/)!


## Defensiveness / psychological safety

People would like to share but uncomfortable, fear of criticism, that's what they're
used to from their grad program, etc.

That environment is TRAUMATIC.

Our goal is to help open the topic, help people be more comfortable, make it easier to
talk about.

Good _and_ bad interactions can be contagious / self-reinforcing.

Stefanie:

* Could be monthly repeated forum to share challenges and positive experiences, provide
  long-term safe supportive space
* Avoid solution engineering! e.g. "You could have said" or "you should do"


## Sunny and my experiences working on Proj Forge from both sides are inspiring to share!

* Sunny learned something from someone with a different perspective.
    * GitHub Actions was new, shared it with colleagues.
* Matt received energy from Sunny's participation and warm reception of an idea.
    * In another community, I felt challenged, discouraged, demotivated about the
      response to the same idea. I'm not saying my idea was good and deserved a positive
      response, but: both positive and negative responses are very inexpensive to give,
      but the outcome of a negative response can be very expensive. "Open science is kind
      science" (Andy Barrett)


## Structure

1 hour

Aside from basic structure setting the stage for the discussion, no leading / no
pre-defined speakers. Any speaking by facilitators should serve the purpose of enabling
group discussion, e.g. sharing an anecdote as an ice-breaker (more below).

Topic is set in advance: "Psychological safety"


### Potential sub-topics from:

* how to give and receive criticism
* trauma and how it effects our future decisions
* how to create a safe environment
* empowerment
* cultural understanding
* best practices to cultivate healthy scientific collaboration


People who propose topics briefly share why they think it's a good topic.


### Schedule

If we have >8 people, let's vote with a tool like slido or menti

Define psychological safety.

Call out the current culture has psychological safety problems.


#### 5 minutes submitting topics

What does psychological safety mean to you? E.g.

* Constructive criticism
* Empowerment

Some things about psychological safety that are important to you or have happened to you


How do you handle situations that make you unsafe?


#### 5 minutes choosing topics / voting

#### Sharing experiences / ice breaker

To set the tone, ask if anyone would like to share a psychological safety experience or
reasons they thing psychological safety is important. If not, we have some stories ready
to go.


##### Sunny & Matt's negative and positive experiences

_TODO_: Think about how to share negative experiences in a way that isn't too shamey

E.g. Sometimes our projects aren't well-received by our peers, and that can cause us to
"drop" ideas we would otherwise pursue.


#### Let go!!!

Let the participants lead the conversation from here.


## TODO

* Create a private GitHub repository to workshop our plan
* Figure out how to set a time? Ask Stefanie? Use when2meet to poll people?
* Develop an invitation that clearly describes what to expect from this meeting, i.e.
  not a lecture, a safe discussion environment, etc.
